hello there ladies and gentlemen this is
mr. Finley and this is a short video on
the comedy of manners
now as you already know coming out of
about 1660 we had the restoration comedy
of the upper classes and that was joined
in about 1760 during the industrial
revolution with the melodramas of the
middle and lower classes and those were
the two dominant forms especially in
English theatre for a very long time
right up until about the year 1900 so
about 200 250 years and these forms of
course don't stay the same over 200 or
250 years they're going to change and
evolve and so we're going to be looking
at them as they existed at the end of
that time period right around the year
1900 the turn of the 20th century
so as you well know at the turn of the
20th century we also have these other
forms coming in realism which is what we
deal with mostly nowadays because of
Henrik Ibsen and all those other Ibsen's
that came from Strindberg you remember
that from last year in theater history
and we'll talk about all those things
moving forward but we're going to be
looking at comedy of manners to deal
with style ah because it is the natural
evolution of restoration comedy and
melodrama which are two very highly
stylistic forms of theatre and it's a
little bit more accessible to us so what
do we mean by comedy of matters well a
comedy of manners like melodrama and
like restoration comedy it deals with
class structure and status like
Restoration comedy deals with fashion
like melodrama there are very elaborate
plots with happy endings but even though
it uses these things it also makes fun
of them it pokes fun at these things so
well we have lords and ladies with you
know very upper crust British accents
and being very concerned with the right
way of doing things and what the fashion
is and what is and is not fashionable it
also makes fun of those things
the language is self-consciously
elevated and elaborate just like in rest
raishin comedy people are judged by the
sort of language that they use and they
show off their intellect but again we've
been doing this for about 200 years by
the time we reach comedy of manners
we're making fun of the fact that people
are speaking in that very elaborate
self-conscious way and so the speaking
isn't naturalistic at all but we're sort
of poking fun at how uptight and
pretentious and elaborate these folks
are and the plots very often hinge on
the polite or socially acceptable way of
doing something versus what would
actually be effective or actually moral
and the right thing to do so there might
be an action that is clearly the right
thing um but society says oh no that's
not fashionable no that's not the right
thing that's not polite that's not
acceptable among our class of people and
that's where the humor comes from this
tension between what is obviously the
correct thing to do versus what is
desired by the very fashionable
Uppercross society at that time so this
is a natural evolution of that comedy in
Restoration comedy dealing with status
and class and wit and so we see the term
comedy of manners being applied
sometimes to those restoration comedies
we even see the term comedy of manners
sometimes apply to much older comedies
from the Roman period but the best
examples of comedy of manners are the
ones that come as a evolution of that
restoration comedy style around the turn
of the century and those are the plays
first of Oscar Wilde he's the most
famous of them as well as the plays of
no coward and the writing of PG
Woodhouse very very British writers
something that you might be familiar
with the show Downton Abbey on PBS it's
become more of a melodrama in the later
seasons but in the first season it was
very much a melodrama and a comedy of
manners dealing with the way these upper
crap upper-class people interacted um
and how the requirements of that class
were funny basically in some cases so
the most famous writer of the comedy of
manners was this guy named Oscar Wilde
he was born in 1854 died in 1900 and
most of his great writing was there at
the end of his life in the 1890s I died
at 46 rather unfortunate he is the most
famous author of these comedies and
comedies are very very funny and he sort
of established the form he was known for
this very elaborate lifestyle and this
very elaborate aesthetic you can see him
there with the sort of poetic gaze and
the weird wavy hair and the giant fur
coat all of those sort of extreme
fashion ideas that we think of in this
Victorian period very much stem from
Oscar Wilde who of course was building
on the fascination with fashion from the
restoration period 200 years before so
he was both a object of fashion um but
he also poked fun at it in his in his
plays so Wiles writing the first thing
of note that he wrote was his novel the
Picture of Dorian Gray in 1890 he'd
written versions of children's stories
before that that are quite good and some
poetry as well but he made a real splash
with the Picture of Dorian Gray which is
a novel and then he switched primarily
to writing plays all of which are these
or at least most of which are these
comedy of manners are really excellent
examples of it with these melodramatic
plots lots of plot twists but things
working out in the end but where fashion
and society and what your class could
and could not do become the subject both
of the plots and the subject of laughter
as well starting with Lady Windermere's
Fan and a woman of no importance in the
early 1890s and then really developing
into the hysterical comedy of manners
with an ideal husband and his most
famous play The Importance of Being
Earnest which we are going to be doing
scenes from as well so keep in mind that
a comedy of manners
I can be set in any period there are
modern comedy of manners that deal with
what is polite or not polite in society
and many of them are set in New York or
London or other very fashionable society
places there's some set in Los Angeles
for example so the comedy of manners
hasn't gone away wherever you've got a
comedy that deals with status and
fashion that's a comedy of manners but
most extreme examples are from this
period the Victorian period when fashion
and class was so important and so those
are the ones that we're going to be
playing around with in class